GROWING CELLULOSE – MEDIUM PREPARATION

I have developed the following recipes based on studio practice and scientific literature. Please feel free to experiment further and share your results.

BACTERIAL STRAIN_ Glucoacetobacter hansenii (G. hansenii)

CONTAINER_ Glass containers can be washed and allow a visual feedback. The container does not need to be particularly high: microbial cellulose grows on the surface of the liquid medium and expands horizontally according to size and shape of the container.

AERATION_ G. hansenii is an aerobic bacterial strain. Providing enough oxygen is crucial, therefore I suggest to cover your container with a cloth [make sure it does not fall into the medium!] to protect the your culture from dust, insects like Drosofila Melanogaster and their eggs. Make sure there are no holes: a single hole is a welcoming open door for hundreds of insects, eggs and larvae!  A lid with a hole filled with Polyfil might work too [I have not tested it yet].

ACIDITY_  Optimal acidity levell to protect the culture from mold is around ph 4.5. You can use white vinegar for this purpose. Red vinegar would work too, but its pigments would dye the cellulose.

CARBON SOURCE_ Glucose.

NITROGEN SOURCE_ Peptone or soy cooking water. Other sources might work as well: some scientific sources refer to peptone, urea, ammonium sulphate and sodium nitrate; common vegetable waste might work for DIY receipts.

TEMPERATURE_ Room temperature.

MEDIUM RECEIPTS _

1. With Soy Peptone
80 gr glucose
20 gr peptone
1l water
0,3 l white vinegar

Please, handle peptone carefully and possibly wear a mask. Peptone is a light sticky powder which can be easily inhaled. It tends to clog in water, so I usually dilute peptone in a small amount of water and then add this mixture with the remaining water. 

2. With soy cooking water
80 gr glucose
0,3 l white vinegar
1l Soy cooking water

How to prepare soy water:
500 gr dried soy beans, rinsed
soak for 12 hrs in 2 l [The amount of water needed for cooking and soaked by soybeans may vary according to the type of soy]
Cook UNSALTED. ** In a pressure cooker it takes 20 minutes; in a saucepan simmer for 2-3 hours according to the type of soy.
Drain the soybeans – You can now eat them ??
KEEP the water, cool it, filter it.
Mix it with glucose and vinegar.


by margherita pevere