Malt Extract Agar (MEA)

1000ml or 1000g Distilled Water
20 grams light malt extract
2 grams powdered nutritional yeast
20 grams agar

This is a very simple blend and is made by combining the dry ingredients and then sprinkling them over 1000ml of distilled water as you would have in step 5 of 
the PDA recipes. Once mixed simply pour into your vessel and sterilize at 15 PSI for 30 minutes.


Step 5: Add your powdered mix of agar and dextrose to the potato broth by slowly and steadily sprinkling it over top of the water until all of it has been added.
 This will help prevent clumping which can remain even after you've sterilized your media.



Once your media has been sterilized you can pour it into your sterile petri dishes. Pouring hot media can be a difficult task and requires a swift and steady hand for pouring. You do not 
want to have drops of media leaving deposits on the rims and edges of the dishes.

You can allow the media to cool a bit before pouring but do not let the temperature drop too much otherwise as the volume decreases you will find the media begins to solidify while pouring 
due to it losing heat more rapidly than when you started. Typically 85°C/185°F is a good temperature to start pouring at. The lowest you would want to pour at is 55°C/155°F.

Tip: Setting up your petri dishes in stacks 3-4 high lined up and pouring starting from the bottom dish first by lifting all dishes on top of the lowest petri dish to be filled in each stack 
is ideal and allows for swift pouring. Once the stack is filled, slide it back and out of the way, then slide in your next stack. Ensure you have enough room, fumbling over where to place things mid-procedure will only cause issues.


Once your dishes are completely cooled you can use them to conduct tissue culture from fresh mushrooms, or grow and isolate your own cultures from spore.

There you have it. 3 different formulas of agar media that are well suited for growing a variety of edible mushroom cultures including Agaricus, Lentinus, Pleurotus, Stropharia, Hericium, and many other exciting species.